[docs] drop index ysql (#17543)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/api/ysql/the-sql-language/statements/ddl_drop_index.md

> ---

Reviewer: Add the command to the statements page ddl table

    identifier: ddl_drop_index
    parent: statements
aliases:
  - /preview/api/ysql/commands/ddl_drop_index/
type: docs
---

## Synopsis

Use the `DROP INDEX` statement to remove one or more indexes from the database.

## Syntax

<ul class="nav nav-tabs nav-tabs-yb">
  <li >
    <a href="#grammar" class="nav-link active" id="grammar-tab" data-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="grammar" aria-selected="true">
      <img src="/icons/file-lines.svg" alt="Grammar Icon">
      Grammar
    </a>
  </li>
  <li>
    <a href="#diagram" class="nav-link" id="diagram-tab" data-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="diagram" aria-selected="false">
      <img src="/icons/diagram.svg" alt="Diagram Icon">
      Diagram
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

<div class="tab-content">
  <div id="grammar" class="tab-pane fade show active" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="grammar-tab">
  {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/drop_index.grammar.md" %}}
  </div>
  <div id="diagram" class="tab-pane fade" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="diagram-tab">
  {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/drop_index.diagram.md" %}}
  </div>
</div>

## Semantics

> ### *drop_index*

Reviewer 2: What is "drop_index" for?

Author: Removed in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17543/commits/c58a6192f69364400f8f7d7af77296882f56312d

#### *if_exists*

Under normal operation, an error is raised if the index does not exist.  Adding `IF EXISTS` will quietly ignore any non-existent indexes specified.

#### *index_name*

> Specify the name of the index to be dropped. Objects associated with the index, such as other indexes, will be eventually invalidated after the `DROP INDEX` statement is completed.

Reviewer 2: > Objects associated with the index, such as other indexes

Is index on an index even possible?

Author: What about indexes on partitioned tables?

Author: Removed in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17543/commits/c1dede4349eb3356b5ec436541de47356c31a913

#### RESTRICT / CASCADE

> `RESTRICT` is the default and it will not drop the index if any objects depend on it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`RESTRICT` (the default) will not drop the index if any objects depend on it.
```

cc: @ddhodge in case it's a bad suggestion

Reviewer: lgtm

`CASCADE` will drop any objects that transitively depend on the index.

## Example

Create a table with an index:

```plpgsql
CREATE TABLE t1(id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, v TEXT);

> 

Reviewer 2: useless empty newline

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17543/commits/1c4176f4a519a0d1df7d0495af7f7992cc922ecf

CREATE INDEX i1 ON t1(v);
```

> Watch the newly created index:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Verify the index was created:
```

> ```sql

Reviewer 2: should it be "output" instead of "sql"?

Reviewer: Good point - actually it is 2 code blocks, the command is one sql block, and then the output is a separate output block

Author: Did in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17543/commits/0e277e16662ef91b117d388fef26bfc800c32868

yugabyte=# \d t1
                            Table "public.t1"
 Column |  Type  | Collation | Nullable |            Default             
--------+--------+-----------+----------+--------------------------------
 id     | bigint |           | not null | nextval('t1_id_seq'::regclass)
 v      | text   |           |          | 
Indexes:
    "t1_pkey" PRIMARY KEY, lsm (id HASH)
    "i1" lsm (v HASH)

```

Drop the index:

```sql
DROP INDEX i1;
```

The 'DROP' now succeeds and the `\d t1` meta-command shows that the index no longer exists.

## See also

- [`CREATE INDEX`](../ddl_create_index)

> - [`INSERT`](../dml_insert)

Reviewer: why insert and select particularly?

Author: No reason, they were on "create table" which I copied as template.

`CASCADE` will drop any objects that transitively depend on the index.

## Example

Create a table with an index:

```plpgsql
CREATE TABLE t1(id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, v TEXT);
CREATE INDEX i1 ON t1(v);
```

Verify the index was created:

```sql
\d t1
```

```output
                            Table "public.t1"
 Column |  Type  | Collation | Nullable |            Default             
--------+--------+-----------+----------+--------------------------------
 id     | bigint |           | not null | nextval('t1_id_seq'::regclass)
 v      | text   |           |          | 
Indexes:
    "t1_pkey" PRIMARY KEY, lsm (id HASH)
    "i1" lsm (v HASH)
```

Drop the index:

```sql
DROP INDEX i1;
```

Use the `\d t1` meta-command to verify that the index no longer exists.

```sql
\d t1
```

```output
                            Table "public.t1"
 Column |  Type  | Collation | Nullable |            Default             
--------+--------+-----------+----------+--------------------------------
 id     | bigint |           | not null | nextval('t1_id_seq'::regclass)
 v      | text   |           |          | 
Indexes:
    "t1_pkey" PRIMARY KEY, lsm (id HASH)
```

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

---
title: DROP INDEX statement [YSQL]
headerTitle: DROP INDEX
linkTitle: DROP INDEX
description: Use the DROP INDEX statement to remove one or more indexes from the database.
menu:
  preview:
    identifier: ddl_drop_index
    parent: statements
aliases:
  - /preview/api/ysql/commands/ddl_drop_index/
type: docs
---

## Synopsis

> Use the `DROP INDEX` statement to remove one or more indexes from the database.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the `DROP INDEX` statement to remove an index from the database.
```

## Syntax

<ul class="nav nav-tabs nav-tabs-yb">
  <li >
    <a href="#grammar" class="nav-link active" id="grammar-tab" data-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="grammar" aria-selected="true">
      <img src="/icons/file-lines.svg" alt="Grammar Icon">
      Grammar
    </a>
  </li>
  <li>
    <a href="#diagram" class="nav-link" id="diagram-tab" data-toggle="tab" role="tab" aria-controls="diagram" aria-selected="false">
      <img src="/icons/diagram.svg" alt="Diagram Icon">
      Diagram
    </a>
  </li>
</ul>

<div class="tab-content">

>   <div id="grammar" class="tab-pane fade show active" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="grammar-tab">

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <div id="grammar" class="tab-pane fade" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="grammar-tab">
```

  {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/drop_index.grammar.md" %}}
  </div>
  <div id="diagram" class="tab-pane fade" role="tabpanel" aria-labelledby="diagram-tab">
  {{% includeMarkdown "../../syntax_resources/the-sql-language/statements/drop_index.diagram.md" %}}
  </div>
</div>

## Semantics

#### *if_exists*

Under normal operation, an error is raised if the index does not exist.  Adding `IF EXISTS` will quietly ignore any non-existent indexes specified.

#### *index_name*

> Specify the name of the index to be dropped. Objects associated with the index will be eventually invalidated after the `DROP INDEX` statement is completed.

Reviewer 2: "eventually invalidated" gives a bad impression that it is eventually consistent

Author: Removed in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17543/commits/d24873852079954576fa92680dd9bb20257aa83d

#### RESTRICT / CASCADE

`RESTRICT` (the default) will not drop the index if any objects depend on it.

> `CASCADE` will drop any objects that transitively depend on the index.

Reviewer 2: I couldn't come up with any case where this works.  RESTRICT/CASCADE isn't even tested.  Could you come up with a case where CASCADE succeeds?  I tried partitioned index and unique constraint index, but both error instead of cascading.  Same for PG 15.2.

Author: What do you propose I should do?

Reviewer 2: It's optional to verify that it actually works.  I had trouble doing so, so it may be difficult.  Therefore, you can ignore and trust it works.

## Example

Create a table with an index:

```plpgsql
CREATE TABLE t1(id BIGSERIAL PRIMARY KEY, v TEXT);
CREATE INDEX i1 ON t1(v);
```

Verify the index was created:

```sql
\d t1
```

```output
                            Table "public.t1"
 Column |  Type  | Collation | Nullable |            Default             
--------+--------+-----------+----------+--------------------------------
 id     | bigint |           | not null | nextval('t1_id_seq'::regclass)
 v      | text   |           |          | 
Indexes:
    "t1_pkey" PRIMARY KEY, lsm (id HASH)
    "i1" lsm (v HASH)
```

Drop the index:

```sql
DROP INDEX i1;
```

> Use the `\d t1` meta-command to verify that the index no longer exists.

Reviewer 2: Why not show the output as well?

Author: Fixed in https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/pull/17543/commits/7e1ad42a80fe7b575a77cd91b14803bd44ecd0db
